---
title: WORK IN PROGRESS – Career
description: TBD
unlisted: true
---

# Introduction
Onboarding might last for several days or several weeks as I described in [Acquiring and Onboarding Your First Job](https://jhumelsine.github.io/2026/03/10/first-job.html), but then what?

This blog will continue with past onboarding and into your career.

This are my personal thoughts.
They won't apply to everyone.
They may even be outdated.

As they say in financial disclaimers: ***Past performance is not indicative of future results***

# The First-Year Learning Curve

It often takes several months before a new developer feels comfortable and productive in a professional codebase.

You are learning the product, the tools, the architecture, the business domain, and the team’s development practices all at the same time.
That is a lot to absorb.

Feeling slow or overwhelmed during the first few months is normal. 
Stay curious, keep asking good questions, and focus on steady progress rather than immediate mastery.

# Continuing Education
Your Computer Science degree is not the end of your education.
It is just the beginning of your education.

You've been studying Computer Science. 
Your career will be Software Engineering.
They are related, but different as I described in [You Studied Computer Science. Your Career Will Be Software Engineering.](https://jhumelsine.github.io/2026/02/11/computer-science-software-engineering.html)

Here are some broad areas for your continued learning.

## Domain
As I mentioned in [Paradigm Shift](https://jhumelsine.github.io/2026/03/10/first-job.html#paradigm-shift), data structures and algorithms aren't enough.
You will need to know how to apply these to your customer's domain, which might cause a new software developer to ask, "What's the customer's domain?"

_Domain_ is a major concept in [Domain-Driven Design](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain-driven_design), which is a concept I'll be covering in detail in the future (TBD).
For now, it's sufficient to know that domain is the customer's business.
It's the nature of their business.
Netflix's domain is streaming video content to subscribers.
Linkedin's domain is allowing users to create a network of professional connections.
Amazon's original domain was selling books, but it's expanded beyond that.

Knowing how to code is insufficient.
Knowing how to code to solve a problem in the customer's domain is what's required.

Most software engineers learn their customer's domain on the job.
This takes time.
However, once you've learned the domain for one customer, it will become easier to learn the domain for another customer.
It's similar to how people who learn two natural languages growing up find it easier to learn additional languages than those who only learned one native language.
My first customer domain was telecommunications.
My second customer domain was military applications.
I used to joke that there wasn't much difference in the C++ code between telecom network elements and military tanks, except that network elements didn't tend to roam around fields firing shells.

## Software Engineering Principles, Patterns, Practices, Procedures, Policy and Process
The **P**s probably aren't covered in most Computer Science programs.
I'll provide a brief summary for each.

### Principles

### Patterns

### Practices

#### Version Control/Management

#### Code Reviews
In college, you usually submit an assignment, receive a grade, and move on.  
In industry, your work will be reviewed by other engineers before it becomes part of the product.

This is normal and healthy.

Code reviews are not criticism of you personally.
They are how teams maintain quality, share knowledge, and help engineers learn from one another.
Expect feedback, ask questions if something isn’t clear, and view the process as part of your growth as a software engineer.

#### Pair Programming

#### Reading Existing Code
Read more than you write.

Debugging, especially legacy code.

May need to do forensics.

Most assignments in college involve writing code from scratch. In industry, a large portion of your work will involve **reading and understanding code written by other people**.

Large codebases can take time to understand. This is normal. Focus on understanding small pieces at first, follow the flow of the code, and ask questions when something doesn’t make sense.

Reading code is an essential engineering skill, and it improves with practice.

### Policy

### Procedures

#### Tickets 
You won't be able to do anything with a ticket, probably via [Jira](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jira_(software)).
Tickets are how work is tracked.
New features and errors are documented via work tickets.
These electronic entities document:
* The new feature or error with summary and description
* Who reported it
* When it was reported
* Severity and/or priority
* Estimated effort
* Assignee to make the change
* Additional history and comments
* Actual effort
* Etc.

These artifacts are useful to keep track of work, but they tend to take on a life of their own.
Sometimes these ticketing systems become bloated and the tickets require more work to manage than the benefit they provide.

#### Meetings
There will be a lot of meetings ... a lot of them.
This is not a new a new phenomenon:
* **John Cleese** classic video from 1976 in [Meetings, Bloody Meetings](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dsChGa-Dako)
* ***Freakonomics*** podcast from 2019 in [How to Make Meetings Less Terrible](https://freakonomics.com/podcast/how-to-make-meetings-less-terrible-ep-389/)
* ***No Stupid Questions*** podcast from 2021 in [If Everyone Hates Meetings, Why Do We Have So Many of Them?](https://freakonomics.com/podcast/if-everyone-hates-meetings-why-do-we-have-so-many-of-them/)

**NEED MORE CONTENT HERE**

### Process
Process is a tricky thing.

Too much process can overwhealm.
You can start to feel like you're spending all of your time satisfying the process at the expense of getting any real work done.
The tail starts to wag the dog.

Too little process can lead to chaos.
Nothing ever comes together.
The project can be in a mess.

It's difficult to find the right balance between too little and too much process.
Ideally a project will have just enough process so that things run smoothly.
You want the process to work for you.
You don't want to work for the process.

#### Waterfall, Agile, or Waterfall Disguised as Agile

## New Technology
I stated in [Software Engineering Problems](https://jhumelsine.github.io/2026/02/11/computer-science-software-engineering.html#software-engineering-problems):
>The half-life for technology in the Computer Science field is about three to five years and possibly even shorter with the advent of [Generative AI](https://jhumelsine.github.io/2024/09/18/llm-genai.html). All technology I learned in college was mostly obsolete a decade or so into my career.

Technology becomes obsolete because new technology superceeds it.
Much like learning the customer domain on the job, you'll need to learn the new technology on the job.

Right now the greatest disruptive technology is Generative AI.
Those who learn how to leverage it will have an advantage over those who do not.

I have limited experience with Generative AI.
ChatGPT was released upon the world a few months before I retired.
In that short period of time, it's flooded the Software Engineering community.
Many companies have made drastic cuts across the board to be filled by AI, as can be seen in headlines like these: [**Block lays off nearly half its staff because of AI. Its CEO said most companies will do the same**](https://www.cnn.com/2026/02/26/business/block-layoffs-ai-jack-dorsey).

I think this may be shortsighted.
The reports of the death of software engineering is greatly exaggerated.

Generative AI is a tool.
It's a force multiplier.
Generative AI will make good software engineers better and bad software engineers worse.
A power saw in the hands of skilled crafters allows them to build cabinets quicker.
A power saw in the hands of knuckheads allows them to saw their thumbs off quicker.

Generative AI has limited context.
It tends to have a short attention span.
When context is at capacity, you don't know what important knowledge will be jettisoned to make room for new context being added.
This is highligted in [**Coding Is Dead, Long Live Programming**](https://ian-cooper.writeas.com/coding-is-dead-long-live-programming).

Let's examine several ways to leverage Generative AI.

### Vibe Coding

### Boilerplate Coding

### Partner Coding
Cleaner code => fewer tokens. Reference: https://beyond.minimumcd.org/docs/agentic-cd/operations/tokenomics/

How to maintain context better. https://martinfowler.com/articles/reduce-friction-ai/context-anchoring.html

# Summary
TBD

# References
TBD

# NOTES
* Learning. O’Reilly. Modern Software Engineering. Blogs.
* Fortune is when preparation meets opportunity - Seneca
* https://missing.csail.mit.edu/ 
* Focus upon AI.
    * I missed the AI paradigm shift. ChatGPT was released a few months before I retired. My comments are speculative and without any experience to back them up. Take everything I write here with a grain of salt.
    * AI – https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lJiDBRh96oU
    * Vibe Coding?
    * Directing it like an Architect or Tech Lead.
    * If directing, you’ll need to learn Software Engineering skills, such as Design Patterns, Practices/Procedures like TDD, BDD, etc. Organization such as DDD. You may not have to know how to do these directly, but you may need to know how to do them well enough to direct the AI and evaluation what it has produced. I suspect you'll need these, in which case most of my blog entries will be useful and possibly even more important. However, if AI learns and understands these on its own, much like Data Structure implementation specifics or details lower in the stack, they may not be as important day-to-day. Maybe instead of supporting future software engineers, my blogs become an archive of what we used to do before Ai took over.
    * https://ian-cooper.writeas.com/coding-is-dead-long-live-programming
* Take new assignments
* Keep list of accomplishments.
* Stories. What you have done. Good for your current job and the future job too.
* You’re a mercenary
* Don’t expect loyalty from your employer. Follow up to finding a job. It’s not personal, just business.
* You’ll learn more by teaching or explaining something. The Pitt – See one. Do one. Teach one. (SODOTO). It places you in a different frame of mine, much like Rubber Ducking. You may be surprised by how much you actually know or understand something. You may get questions or feedback that makes you think even more about something that helps you gain even better understanding. This applies to almost anything, technology, processes, patterns, business domain, etc.
* When accepting a position, try to stay for at least a year.

# Continuing Education
Use LLMs thoughtfully and strategically to understand the business and technology but verify anything it produces. They hallucinate/confabulate results.

Use LLMs to summarize complex online company documents.
Use LLMs to give you an understanding of what some legacy code does.
However, do not put any company proprietary content, documentation or code, in a generic LLM, such as ChatGPT.
We don't know how it might absorb that content and redistribute it.
Ask your mentor/manager which LLMs you can safely use.
Hopefully, your new employer has a company-approved LLM that you can use safely.

For the most part, process in obtaining a Computer Science degree is basically getting a scoped and well-defined problem assignment, completing it, and then handing it in the following week.
You tend the be the only person doing the implementation.
The main goal is to get the right answer.
You'll may never look at it again.

Things will change from your academic career to your business career.
The questions will be broader and less well defined.
The answers will be fuzzy.
The customer won't be able to describe what they want, but they'll know it when they see it.
Or more likely, they tell you that what they see isn't what they wanted.
You’re not in it alone.
You’re part of a team.
Solve problems together.
You can look for solutions anywhere.
